The Little Engineers Robotics 65-120mm Wheel Mounting Plate for use in conjunction with The Little Engineers Robotics Bearing Plate and Pivot Assembly for motorized or free-spinning wheels.
by Robert "The R.A.T." Allen Turner
http://www.TheLittleEngineers.org/

We are in search of machine shop(s) that might be willing to provide prototype level machining services in exchange for being listed as a recommended manufacturer and/or supplier in all of the open source projects created by The Little Engineers. Contact may be made via: https://www.facebook.com/OurLittleEngineers/ and/or https://www.facebook.com/groups/985537051651794/

All of the projects from The Little Engineers may be found here: https://github.com/TheLittleEngineers?tab=repositories

We intend, eventually, to acquire some small scale 3D Printers and CNC mills/routers to aid in our efforts, however we are currently unable to do so mainly due to finances - We try to operate The Little Engineers as much "out of pocket" as we possibly can. Supporting the Foster Care system is that important to us.

====================

In my quest to build Tod Loofbourrows "Microtron" Robot, it became necessary to design a suitable replacement for the long discontinued motorized wheels that Tod made use of - The Herbach and Rademan, Inc. Catalog #TM20K370 Motorized Wheel. That original version was later replaced by Catalog #TM21K460 which was more or less a direct replacement and then almost a decade later by a much cheaper version of which I do not currently have a catalog number. The much cheaper version can be seen in "BUILD A REMOTE-CONTROLLED ROBOT FOR UNDER $300" by David R. Shircliff, now being published as "BUILD A REMOTE CONTROLLED ROBOT" by David R. Shircliff. That book, in its currently published form, does a terrible disservice to its readers by continuing to cite Herbach and Rademan as the source for those motorized wheels which have not been available for decades - it needs to be seriously updated to recommend some other type of motorized wheel rather than continuing to recommend a motorized caster wheel that has been unavailable for decades. Tods original MicroTron "Mike" article may be found here: https://archive.org/details/197704InterfaceAge with further information available here: http://microtron.nu/, here: http://cyberneticzoo.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/Mike-Microtron-InterfaceAge-Apr1977.pdf and here: http://microtron.nu/introducing-microtron/ with complete construction details available in the book "HOW TO BUILD A COMPUTER-CONTROLLED ROBOT" by Tod Loofbourrow. It might also be pertinent to review "BUILD YOUR OWN WORKING ROBOT" by David L. Heiserman as Tod utilized the Drive and Steering circuits from Davids book to interface MicroTrons computer to the motorized wheels.

====================

This component is only one part of a design intended to replace the motorized wheels with modern equivalents. I will currently be using the free software provided by eMachineShop.com for this endeavour, thus the design files will require the use of that software to open the files. An ".stl" export will also be provided for use in other softwares. If anyone would like to convert the designs to other formats and send them to me, they will be included in this project archive, with your permission, of course. Any such conversions should utilize the same license as the rest of the files in this archive. This project is being released under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA 4.0) License by: Robert "The R.A.T." Allen Turner, on 12 July 2020, In Memory of my Father: Robert Embry Turner, 1945-2019. Rest In Peace Dad - I LOVE YOU.

License: <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/" target="_blank">Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International</a> <a href="https:/creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode" target="_blank">(CC BY-SA 4.0)</a>.

====================

This component is designed to allow the use of rather common 65mm to 120mm wheels in conjunction with the Bearing Plate and Pivot Assembly to create free-spinning, and possibly motorized, caster wheels. Various skate and scooter wheels fit nicely into this diameter range. The wheel radius should not exceed 60mm. The absolute minimum wheel radius is 30mm, however 32.5mm or larger is recommended as the minimum radius. The various threaded holes are for mounting this wheel plate to the pivot plate ("A" holes) and supporting axles sizes of up to 16mm in diameter ("B" through "F" holes). This assembly may be used to create free-spinning or motorized wheels. To this end, the "B" hole is a right-hand threaded M16x1.5 for use with an M16 threaded axle-rod or bolt. The "B" hole is further supported by the "C", "D", "E" and "F" holes which are intended to allow axle sizes of M8, M10, M12 and M15. The "C" holes are right-hand threaded M7x1 holes intended for use in mounting a "KFL000 10mm set-screw pillow-block bearing assembly" thus allowing the use of an axle of 10mm in diameter. The "D" holes are also right-hand threaded M7x1 but are spaced for allowing the use of a "KFL002 15mm set-screw pillow-block". The "E" holes are, again, right-hand threaded M7x1 but are spaced for allowing the use of a "KFL001 12mm set-screw pillow-block". Finally, the "F" holes are right-hand threaded M5x0.8 holes spaced for mounting a "KFL08 8mm set-screw pillow-block". The use of these "pillow-block" bearing assemblies creates a rather smooth rolling wheel and is ideal for robotics and other uses.

I prefer to work in the metric system when designing and machining parts, however, as any robotocist will likely tell you, you must be prepared to work in either a mixture of numerical systems or do the conversions from one to the other "on the fly". I suppose this has a lot to do with my countrys illogical resistance to conversion to the metric system. This reslts in tons of surplus motors, gears, bolts, nuts and so on specified in imperial units. Rather than argue the merits of metric units, I find it easier to "work with what I've got" and specify both units whenever possible, hopefully making the design understandable by all interested parties.



# We are looking for copies of the monthly Herbach and Rademan Catalogs from 1974 through 1987. Any assistance would be greatly appreciated.
