The Little Engineers Robotics Bearing Plate and Pivot Assembly for motorized or free-spinning wheels.
by Robert "The R.A.T." Allen Turner
http://www.TheLittleEngineers.org/

We are in search of machine shop(s) that might be willing to provide prototype level machining services in exchange for being listed as a recommended manufacturer and/or supplier in all of the open source projects created by The Little Engineers. Contact may be made via: https://www.facebook.com/OurLittleEngineers/ and/or https://www.facebook.com/groups/985537051651794/

All of the projects from The Little Engineers may be found here: https://github.com/TheLittleEngineers?tab=repositories

We intend, eventually, to acquire some small scale 3D Printers and CNC mills/routers to aid in our efforts, however we are currently unable to do so mainly due to finances - We try to operate The Little Engineers as much "out of pocket" as we possibly can. Supporting the Foster Care system is that important to us.

====================

In my quest to build Tod Loofbourrows "Microtron" Robot, it became necessary to design a suitable replacement for the long discontinued motorized wheels that Tod made use of - The Herbach and Rademan, Inc. Catalog #TM20K370 Motorized Wheel. That original version was later replaced by Catalog #TM21K460 which was more or less a direct replacement and then almost a decade later by a much cheaper version of which I do not currently have a catalog number. The much cheaper version can be seen in "BUILD A REMOTE-CONTROLLED ROBOT FOR UNDER $300" by David R. Shircliff, now being published as "BUILD A REMOTE CONTROLLED ROBOT" by David R. Shircliff. That book, in its currently published form, does a terrible disservice to its readers by continuing to cite Herbach and Rademan as the source for those motorized wheels which have not been available for decades - it needs to be seriously updated to recommend some other type of motorized wheel rather than continuing to recommend a motorized caster wheel that has been unavailable for decades. Tods original MicroTron "Mike" article may be found here: https://archive.org/details/197704InterfaceAge with further information available here: http://microtron.nu/, here: http://cyberneticzoo.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/Mike-Microtron-InterfaceAge-Apr1977.pdf and here: http://microtron.nu/introducing-microtron/ with complete construction details available in the book "HOW TO BUILD A COMPUTER-CONTROLLED ROBOT" by Tod Loofbourrow. It might also be pertinent to review "BUILD YOUR OWN WORKING ROBOT" by David L. Heiserman as Tod utilized the Drive and Steering circuits from Davids book to interface MicroTrons computer to the motorized wheels.

====================

This component is only one part of a design intended to replace the motorized wheels with modern equivalents. I will currently be using the free software provided by eMachineShop.com for this endeavour, thus the design files will require the use of that software to open the files. If anyone would like to convert the designs to other formats and send them to me, they will be included in this project archive, with your permission, of course. Any such conversions should utilize the same license as the rest of the files in this archive. This project is being released under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA 4.0) License by: Robert "The R.A.T." Allen Turner, on 12 July 2020, In Memory of my Father: Robert Embry Turner, 1945-2019. Rest In Peace Dad - I LOVE YOU.

License: <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/" target="_blank">Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International</a> <a href="https:/creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode" target="_blank">(CC BY-SA 4.0)</a>.

====================

This component is designed to allow the use of rather common Lazy Susan Style Turntable Bearings as a "steering" mechanism for robots or other projects that require a vertical axis steering of some sort. A few classic robots that used this type of steering are Buster (1976) by David L. Heiserman, Microtron (1977) by Tod Loofbourrow [based on Buster but replacing the hardwired TTL brain with a KIM-I SBC], The Robot Pet "Rover" by Frank DaCosta, and Robart I by Hobart R. Everett. There are many others, but those few come immediately to mind.

I prefer to work in the metric system when designing and machining parts, however, as any robotocist will likely tell you, you must be prepared to work in either a mixture of numerical systems or do the conversions from one to the other "on the fly". I suppose this has a lot to do with my countrys illogical resistance to conversion to the metric system. This reslts in tons of surplus motors, gears, bolts, nuts and so on specified in imperial units. Rather than argue the merits of metric units, I find it easier to "work with what I've got" and specify both units whenever possible, hopefully making the design understandable by all interested parties.

Looking at this component from the top, it is easy enough to see that it is simply a square having sides meausuring 101.6mm (4"). Although not quite so obvious, the thickness is specified to be at least 3.17mm (.125"). The thickness should be at least enough to allow for a minimum of two complete threads in the threaded holes. The thicker you go, the more expensive it becomes to have the part machined, but the less likely that the threads will "strip". If you can afford to have the component machined to a thickness of at least 12.7mm (.5"), you will end up with a much more sturdy end product, however, the specified 3.17mm (.125") should be just fine for most purposes. Note that increasing the thickness much larger than 3.17mm (.125") may require the elimination of the "C" or "D" (or both) holes (see below for a description of these holes and note that they are unlikely to be used in actual practice, thus elimination does no harm) depending upon the capabilities of your machinist/machine shop. Certainly, the eMachineShop.com software will recommend this during price quotation, although other shops may not. Continuuing to look at the component from the top, you will observe a plethora of mostly threaded holes. The holes around the perimeter and moving towards the center are for the mounting of various sizes of lazy susan style turntable bearings as well as for mounting the plate to some square stock (aluminum or steel, 25.4mm (1") by 25.4mm (1")). The centermost holes are for mounting an M14 or smaller bolt for use as a steering shaft and/or shear pin, to be described below. Shear pin may not be the correct term here, but it basically allows the useful weight load of the lazy susan assembly to be increased significantly.

Holes A, B, C and D are specified according to the datasheet published by "Triangle Manufacturing" in reference to their "Steel Square Lazy Susan Turntable Bearing, 20 Gauge - 4-inch (101.6mm), ungreased, center to center 2.16-inch (54.86mm), pre-plated electrogalvanized finish, Part #: 4C". Triangle Manufacturing is the original manufacturer of lazy susan style turntable bearings and as such should be considered THE Industry Standard, however, various other lazy susan style turntable bearings from other manufacturers should work, but may not be within this particular specification. Specifically, many manufacturers eliminate the "self-tapping" screw holes. The various other lazy susan style turntable bearings should hopefully be "close enough" to work. It is thus that holes A, B, C and D are specified according to the Triangle Manufacturing datasheet as follows:

A = Right-Hand threaded M4x0.7 holes. These are intended to match the four outermost mounting holes on the bottom plate of the lazy susan assembly. In most cases, a lazy susan turntable bearing is agnostic as far as to which mounting plate is the top and which is the bottom, however, Triangle Manufacturing was rather specific as to which side is the top and which side is the bottom insofar as the Part #: 4C is concerned. It is thus probably a good idea to follow their recommendation as to proper mounting orientation of the 4" (101.6mm) lazy susan turntable bearing assembly. The datasheet actually specifies the diameter of these holes as 0.156" (3.97mm) rather than the M4x0.7 threading that I have specified here. As it happens, an M4x0.7 bolt will thread nicely through the 3.97mm mounting holes of the lazy susan turntable bearing assembly and will fasten it snugly to this "bearing plate and pivot" assembly that I have designed. These holes are placed centered to the four corners of a square covering an area of 3.531" (89.69mm) by 3.531" (89.69mm).

B = Right-Hand threaded M4x0.7 holes. These are intended to match the four outermost mounting holes on the top plate of the lazy susan assembly. The use of these "B" holes, then, would mean placing the turntable bearing on the bottom side of this "bearing plate and pivot" assembly. Of course, everything would probably work just fine if the 4" (101.6mm) lazy susan turntable bearing assembly were to be mounted "upside down" to the top of the "bearing plate and pivot" assembly. That particular decision is left to you. The datasheet actually specifies the diameter of these holes as 0.156" (3.97mm) rather than the M4x0.7 threading that I have specified here. As it happens, an M4x0.7 bolt will thread nicely through the 3.97mm mounting holes of the lazy susan turntable bearing assembly and will fasten it snugly to this "bearing plate and pivot" assembly. These holes are placed centered to the four corners of a square covering an area of 3.188" (80.96mm) by 3.188" (80.96mm).

C = 0.094" (2.39mm) non-threaded holes. These are intended to match the four innermost mounting holes on the bottom plate of the lazy susan assembly and are specified in the datasheet as being for "#6 Self-Tapping Screws". These holes are placed centered to the four corners of a square covering an area of 2.937" (74.61mm) by 2.937" (74.61mm). It is unlikely that we will need to use these particular holes in actual practice and many "third-party" manufacturers do not even include them in their product. They are, however, included in this design "just in case".

D = 0.094" (2.39mm) non-threaded holes. These are intended to match the four innermost mounting holes on the top plate of the lazy susan assembly and are specified in the datasheet as being for "#6 Self-Tapping Screws". The use of these "D" holes, then, would mean placing the turntable bearing on the bottom side of this "bearing plate and pivot" assembly. Of course, everything would probably work just fine if the 4" (101.6mm) lazy susan turntable bearing assembly were to be mounted "upside down" to the top of the "bearing plate and pivot" assembly. These holes are placed centered to the four corners of a square covering an area of 2.750" (69.85mm) by 2.750" (69.85mm). It is unlikely that we will need to use these particular holes in actual practice and many "third-party" manufacturers do not even include them in their product. They are, however, included in this design "just in case".

Note that an error exists in the Triangle Manufacturing datasheet in regards to the "center to center 2.16-inch (54.86mm)" specification. That figure (2.16-inch) is actually the diameter of the center hole in the Part #: 4C.

========================================

Holes E and F are specified according to the datasheet published by "Triangle Manufacturing" in reference to their "Steel Square Lazy Susan Turntable Bearing, 22 Gauge - 3-inch (76.20mm), ungreased, center to center 2.563-inch (65.09mm), pre-plated electrogalvanized finish, Part #: 3C". It is thus that holes E and F are specified according to the Triangle Manufacturing datasheet as follows:

E = Right-Hand threaded M4x0.7 holes. These are intended to match the four outermost mounting holes on the top and/or bottom plate of the lazy susan assembly. The datasheet actually specifies the diameter of these holes as 0.156" (3.97mm) rather than the M4x0.7 threading that I have specified here. As it happens, an M4x0.7 bolt will thread nicely through the 3.97mm mounting holes of the lazy susan turntable bearing assembly and will fasten it snugly to this "bearing plate and pivot" assembly. These holes are placed centered to the four corners of a square covering an area of 2.563" (65.09mm) by 2.563" (65.09mm).

F =  0.094" (2.39mm) non-threaded holes. These are intended to match the four innermost mounting holes on the top plate of the lazy susan assembly and are specified in the datasheet as being for "#6 Self-Tapping Screws". In most cases, a lazy susan turntable bearing is agnostic as far as to which mounting plate is the top and which is the bottom, however, Triangle Manufacturing was rather specific as to which side is the top and which side is the bottom insofar as the Part #: 3C is concerned. It is thus probably a good idea to follow their recommendation as to proper mounting orientation of the 3" (76.20mm) lazy susan turntable bearing assembly. The use of these "F" holes, then, would mean placing the turntable bearing on the bottom side of this "bearing plate and pivot" assembly. Of course, everything would probably work just fine if the 3" (76.20mm) lazy susan turntable bearing assembly were to be mounted "upside down" to the top of the "bearing plate and pivot" assembly. Again, that particular decision is left to you. These holes are placed centered to the four corners of a square covering an area of 2.125" (53.97mm) by 2.125" (53.97mm). It is unlikely that we will need to use these particular holes in actual practice and many "third-party" manufacturers do not even include them in their product. They are, however, included in this design "just in case". Unlike the Part #: 4C product, this Part #: 3C assembly includes the self-tapping screw holes only on the top of the bearing assembly.

Note that the "bearing plate and pivot" assembly requires the 3" bearing assembly to be attached rotated by 45-degrees. This prevents the screw holes from overlapping, or being too close to, the screw holes for the 4" bearing assembly.

========================================

The G holes are specified according to a metric lazy susan bearing assembly of 71mm by 71mm (2.8" by 2.8"). These Right-Hand threaded M4x0.7 holes are placed centered to the four corners of a square covering an area of 57.5mm (2.26") by 57.5mm (2.26"). These 71mm bearing assemblies are often sold as 3" lazy susan turntablew bearing assemblies and are quite common. These are the ones that I, myself, intend to utilize.

========================================

There seem to be two rather common 2" (50.8mm) lazy susan turntable bearing assemblies available. These actually measure about 50mm by 50mm, rather than the 50.8mm listed above. One manufacturer specifies the mounting holes spaced 40mm apart and the other has them placed 42mm apart (center to center). It is thus that the H and I holes are included to support these 2" (50mm) lazy susan turntable bearing assemblies. The H holes are Right-Hand threaded M4x0.7 holes and are placed centered to the four corners of a square covering an area of 40mm (1.5748") by 40mm (1.5748"). The I holes are Right-Hand threaded M4x0.7 holes and are placed centered to the four corners of a square covering an area of 42mm (1.65354") by 42mm (1.65354").

Note that the "bearing plate and pivot" assembly requires the bearing assembly having the holes placed 40mm center-to-center to be attached rotated by 45-degrees. This prevents the screw holes from overlapping, or being too close to, any of the other screw holes.

========================================

The "J" holes are right-hand threaded M6x1 and are intended for use in bolting the plate to four pieces af metal square stock having matching threaded holes. The square stock should be 25.4mm by 25.4mm (1" by 1"). The square stock should be two pieces of 101.6mm (4") in length and two pieces of 50.8mm (2") in length.

========================================
The "K" hole is an M14x1.25 left-hand threaded hole intended to accept an M14 threaded rod or bolt inserted from the underside of the plate and for use as a steering shaft. Ideally, a thredaded pipe should be used to allow any motor power wires to be run through it, however, this is not strictly necessary. It might be pertinent to respecify this hole for standard Lamp Pipe although it is unlikely that lamp pipe will be able to handle the steering torque of a heavy machine. The lamp pipe standards can be seen here: http://www.lampshademaker.com/lamp_pipe_size_chart.htm in the event that you would like to experiment with it.

The M14 "K" hole is further supported by the "L" and "M" holes which are intended to allow the attachment of various rigid flange couplers or hubs to adapt the M14 "K" hole to various other sizes such as M8, M10, etcetera. The "L" holes are spaced 26mm (1.024") apart, center to center, to match commonly available M11, M12 and M14 couplers/hubs. The "M" holes are spaced 16mm (.63") apart, center to center, to match commonly available M6, M8 and M10 couplers/hubs. The hole spacing should be standard enough to support various other sizes of coupling hubs. The "L" holes are left-hand threaded M4x0.7 and the "M" holes are left-hand threaded M3x0.5, again, to match those required by commonly available couplers/hubs. It is more or less at this point that we should be thankful for the 3D printing industry for the proliferation of these "standards" in regards to these particular components.

Note that the use of the lazy susan style bearing assemblies implies a maximum supported weight according to that specified by the particular bearing assembly used. However, the use of a threaded steering bolt or rod allows a nut to be bolted down through the center hole of the bearing assembly for use as a "shear pin" of sorts thus increasing the useful load capacity of the bearing assembly.

The next component to be designed will be the wheel mount panels that attach to the sides of this bearing plate and pivot assembly. The wheel mount pieces will actually be designed to bolt to the 1" (25.4mm) by 1" (25.4mm) square tube metal stock mentioned above. Several different side panels will be designed to allow the use of various commonly available motor/gearbox combinations such as the Cytron Product Code: KIT-PW-5WL "Motor Mount & 5 Inches Wheel Kit", 550-type plastic gearboxes from childrens ride-on toys and so on.
 
 
 # We are looking for copies of the monthly Herbach and Rademan Catalogs from 1974 through 1987. Any assistance would be greatly appreciated.
